He showed him my projections for the courses I wanted to offer, and I largely made the decision on that, and how many sections and all we wanted.
He said, well, where are your figures?
I pointed to my head and said, here.
He said, well, I want figures.
So he changed, made changes.
in what I projected.
And he made his projections on what the registrar's office had told him.
And my projections were made on the basis of what I'd learned from Austin Curley, whose figures I found I could trust.
And that was after our big bust up with
with having hired three people from the figures of registrar's office at Gimmie.
I had to find a different source of information, so I went to Austin Curley.
Was that when he was over at the basic division?
I forget what it was called, but anyhow, he interviewed all the freshmen.
And he had a better idea than the registrar's office of how many students we would actually end up with.
And so I went to him.
and got information.
After that, I would make up a bunch of figures and would take more than an economics major to figure them out and gave them to him.
As long as he had figures, Maxwell was satisfied, but it still came out of my head and from what I got from Austin Curley.
Of all the deans, and I'm not going to ask the negative, of all the deans that the Department of English worked under, regardless of what the name was of the unit, to which dean or deans would you give the highest marks?
I forget what his name was.
There was one that came, I think, after Dean Brooks.
Dwayne?
I danced with his wife, and one department member said, you got your raise because you danced with the dean's wife.
And I said, no, I got the raise because my wife danced with the dean.
We'll think about that later when it's... But anyhow, he was, I think... Billy Joe, do you remember who the dean was that...
She used to come to the Dinner Dance Club.
I believe she's in there.
What about which president that you served under would you give the highest to?
Which president would you give the highest marks?
I think he would have to end up with Rudder because of the changes.
I would give high marks to Maxwell in part, although some of the things he and I disagreed with hardly.
I remember him calling up one time and saying,
I know you refused to do this, but why?
I can't remember why you refused to do it.
And I said, well, would you mind telling me?
I said, I'd be glad to.
And I said, if you call again, I'll be glad to tell you the same thing.
And we had that kind of relationship, you know, that you could, and as long as you could back what you had to say, he would accept it.
I even called him, I told him one time, you don't dare
give this man a course until you listen to why I think you shouldn't."
And I said, he'll be down to see you and you don't dare speak to him before I speak to him.
He said, well, come inside off.
And so I went in and the man didn't get what he wanted because Maxwell was willing to listen.
But I remember at one faculty meeting, I don't know whether you were there,
They were having all the student uprisings at other schools, and he and Van Riper, who had come from situations where they had student problems, wanted to close and lock the doors.
And I stood up and said, you can't do that.
It's against fire laws and safety laws, I said.
And then I told him I didn't think there was a problem, and if any students came and sat in on the meeting, they deserved what they got.
Do you remember ever any class interruption?
No.
That was the same year, I think, when they marched on the school to the president's office to welcome him.
And somebody gave him $10,000 or something like that.
Now, the university, as it is growing, coeducation, racial integration, and so forth, the English department begins to grow.
Describe how the department changed as you all began to have a broader program.
Well, the...
I think that the major change is that instead of a more congenial department, it's factionalized.
They're little groups, and they're more unhappy people.
I'm not saying that there was ever a time when everybody was happy.
But as I said, 35 of my 37 and a half years were good years.
They were years I enjoyed working and I put in some mighty long days.
But a lot of those days were with people who enjoyed working and you enjoyed working with them.
But I get the impression now that
There are so many different kinds of pressures and so many different jealousies and so much infighting.
It's not a happy place.
Did you ever, as a faculty member or departmental administrator, ever have any kind of pressure to give an unearned grade to anybody?
Yes, one time.
I gave a man a failing grade.
The dean of, I don't know, petroleum engineering or some engineering department wanted to change the grade.
And they called and tried me.
He was graduating senior or something.
and they called and tried to get me to change the grade and I refused and then I heard that the grade had been changed.
So I went down and tried to see the dean and he was busy and couldn't see me.
And so I started yelling at the top of my lungs in the secretary's office, calling him all sorts of names and what a coward he was, not coming out to see me and so on.
So I'm sure he heard what I had to say.
And I wrote, I think, a letter about it, but I don't know whether anything was done but that.
I remember early on when I was at Johnny Hayes.
home one day and visiting, and two members of the athletic department came and tried to get him to change the grades for two football players.
And he said, no, I can't do that.
And then they abandoned the one fella and tried to get the other one, and he was an Indian, and he was .
But they never got very far in that.
But never any call from the president's office or the dean's office or a former student or a board member?
No.
And what about from athletics?
Well, the only time I had any
dealings with the athletic department about grades was when Jerry Claiborne was there, and they tried to keep on top of things.
And they tried to anticipate problems.
And it was not a pressure to change the grades under Bear Bryant.
And Jerry, it was, what can we do to keep our students in line and get them passed?
So I never had any trouble with him at all.
Am I correct that Jerry Claiborne tactfully let people know that he was a Phi Beta Kappa member?
Well, I found it out by accident myself when he lived right across the street for a while.
And my one big laugh was when his wife, speaking to Billy Joe, said, your husband must be a brain.
I thought, my God, her husband is a Phi Beta Kappa, and I never came close to that.
She thought I was a brain.
What did she think of her husband, for God's sake?
But no, I don't know whether he...
did it tactfully or otherwise.
He never said that to me.
As you look back over all those years, who deserves most credit for the progress that the English Department made?
Well, that's hard to say.
I think that
Harry Hearth did a great job, but I think there.
In the rank and file faculty, were there some outstanding teachers?
Oh, yes.
Who?
From early on, we had some outstanding teachers.
I thought Sam Southwell was a very good man.
Who?
Sam Southwell.
Southwell.
And, of course, again, Freddy Eckfeldt was a great teacher.
And I think we've had quite a few good teachers and we've had quite a few bad teachers.
I think it's like anything else.
Some people are scholars and some people are scholar teachers and some are teachers and not scholars and you end up with a wide variety.
Who were the outstanding scholars?
Well, John Q. Anderson was supposedly one, but again, he had people, and I don't know how much jealousy was involved in it, but he did a great deal.
I thought Sam Soth was a scholarly type.
Nick Quick was a scholarly type.
I'm not sure how much Nick wrote, but...
As you look back, for you, share some satisfying moments, some times that you look back on with joy and pleasure.
Well, there are so many things that I've enjoyed about the place.
Yes.
Describe those.
Well, I enjoyed meeting my wife and getting married.
That was a highlight of my years at A&M.
I enjoyed the sort of fellowship that we used to have in the department.
That was a big thing.
We used to have meetings.
It started out when we'd start to go for coffee.
And they got more and more, and then we finally end up going out for dinner one night a month or so.
And then when we got women teachers in here, some of the, it was sort of an all-male thing, and so some of the women teachers wanted to go because they thought they would get advancement by getting to be there.
And then Lee Martin said he couldn't go anymore to the meetings as department head.
if women were to admit it.
And there were a few of the diehard men who had hated having women students who didn't want to admit women teachers, but most of us welcomed them.
And then when they got so they could come and they found out how
that there wasn't any, you weren't going to get any preferment for promotion or classes or anything like being there.
And how dull some of the men could do, and what some of their ambitions were, see how many beer cans they could stack one upon the other.
Which I thought was stupid myself.
They quit coming, but they had achieved what they wanted, and I wasn't invited.
of what are you most proud for those 37 years?
Well, I'm proud of having never backed up to a pay table.
I am proud of having earned my keep and being the first person in 38 years without a PhD to be appointed a full professor and then an emeritus professor.
And in spite of the fact that
The department head who put me forward didn't particularly like me because I told him when he said, after the first month of his headship, he said, you don't approve of me, do you?
I said, no, I don't.
And he said, would you mind telling me why?
I said, I'd be glad to.
I said, do you shoot from the hip?
And he said, well, what do you mean by that?
I said, well, you act and then you think.
And I said, that's supposed to be the other way around.
Oh, that flew all over him.
And so ever after, as his administrative assistant, he would come to me.
And if he was in deep trouble, he would come to my office.
If he was only in minor trouble, he'd call me in.
And so I could tell how much trouble he had, and he always prefaced his remarks with, you'll probably think I've been shooting from the hip again.
And I would say you'd probably be right.
I'll probably be right, and I was.
But he was the one who put me forward as full professor in spite of all that.
Let's see, did the students ever attempt any good bull pranks on you in class, out of class?
No.
My, one of the things I was proudest of was when I retired, that summer I had last classes were two of the best I ever had in speech.
I love them and I think they like me and both classes gave me retirement parties and one gave me two parties.
So I think that would highlight the fact that my students would give me retirement parties.
Another highlight of my life was although I didn't teach graduate classes,
My last year, the graduate students asked me to speak at their banquet.
I like the fact that over the years, many departments and colleges asked me to be a banquet speaker or a lecture to them.
Engineering school asked me to come over and talk to their
They're graduate students about writing and speech.
Your favorite course to teach?
Well, at one time I would have thought it was creative writing, but I never had that many fine creative writing students.
I always enjoyed teaching speech.
I always said that the only problem with teaching speech is you had to listen.
But I love to talk.
The year I first sold three national magazines within a span of three months, I asked myself, do you want to be a full-time writer or do you want to be a writer who
writes part-time and teaches.
I had no trouble deciding.
I had to be a teacher because I needed the association with people.
I needed an audience.
I always knew, I think, in the back of my mind growing up that I would be a teacher.
I decided I wanted the association with people.
And I think speech was probably my most satisfying thing.
And I did learn to listen.
All right.
Now, I've about run out of the questions I had thought of in advance.
What have we not covered that we should have?
Oh, Pinky Downs.
Pinky Downs was, of course, one of the world's great characters, and I always ask my speech students, why did you come to A&M?
And one student said, well, I was hitchhiking on my way to Waco to go to school, where I was signed up.
And he said, this little man in a white Ford picked me up, and I never got beyond the Eastgate.
Were you here when we had the 75th anniversary of the college?
Of the college?
Yeah, of A&M.
No, no.
Because that would have been… I forget what year it was.
That would have been 50…
Well, I don't remember what year it was, but anyhow, each college had to present some kind of honoring of the 75th year, and so liberal arts decided to have something, and I was selected to decide what it would be and to do it.
And so I couldn't think of anything offhand quickly that would represent the entire college.
And so I read in the Houston Post about a man named Louis Lenz, who had attended all of the football games for 50 years or so without missing, except during the Warriors or something like that, and that he had a fabulous collection of Texana.
So I thought, well, that would at least represent history and English.
So I decided we would have an exhibit of his Texana in the
And so I got their display cases allotted to me.
And I called Louie and went down to see, got an appointment, went down to Houston and met him.
And he said, well, he would, he would
lend a collection so long as he could oversee the putting it and displaying it.
I said, well, that's fine.
I would prefer that.
So he came up and he had heel spurs.
He was sitting in a wheelchair and he was supervising by putting the books on display that we had chosen that would be representative of Texas and A&M and all.
And Pinky Downs came in.
And just before that, he had told me that he and Pinky were classmates and that they had sneaked out of chapel and out the window and so on and so forth.
And so he greeted Pinky with open arms and they kissed one another on both cheeks and carried on in great style.
Louie did most of the talking.
So then after a while, a student asked
Louie Lenz bought one of the books and he started talking and Pinky sidled up to me and he said, Who is this man?
I said, Pinky, you don't remember Louie Lenz who was in your class.
And you used to sneak out of chapel together.
He said, well, what does he do?
I said, well, he's just retired recently from the oil business.
And they gave him a great retirement party in Houston.
And I gave him a whole list of things.
After the student turned away, Pinky said, Louie, old buddy.
He said, didn't I read where you retired recently?
Yes.
Did they give you a big retirement book?
And everything I had told Pinky, then he recited it to Louie.
And Louie just ate it up that his old friend Pinky should know all about him and been following his career all these years.
What a masterful snow job that was.
That was one of the highlights of my life, seeing Pinky do that.
Pinky was everywhere.
What else do you have on your list that we should cover?
Oh, you ask about the faculty.
When I first came here, we had a lot of ABDs.
We seemed to attract those.
We also had a lot of people who had been lay preachers or connected with the ministry for one reason or another came here, either after retirement or being fired or giving up the cause.
We had that.
When I first came here, all you had to do was keep your nose clean.
In four years you didn't have to publish.
Publishing was nonexistent almost.
Then in four years or four and a half years, five at the most, you would get promoted to the next rank.
After a while,
That didn't work.
Then you had to have the terminal of the reason that it was publish or perish, and so things changed dramatically on that.
We talked about blacks.
We had several outstanding blacks, but we never had a very big percentage of blacks.
I remember I was astounded at this.
A young man who was black and, of all things, he was made president of the senior class.
Student body.
Student body, yeah.
Fred McClure.
I mean, that was one of the proudest things I was of A&M, that here and this Hydebond School were
So many people who would come out of prejudice would recognize this outstanding student.
I had, there was another young woman I had as a student, black student girl.
And when you came to class, all of the white students would be surrounding her because she was so attractive and charming and intelligent.
They later made her, gave her some kind of a position with minorities on the campus.
But that year when I had her as a student, I had another black student in class.
And so he was sitting at the back of the room.
He was a transfer student.
And he was sitting at the back of the room, and he had his hat on.
And so when I called a roll and got to Mr. Taylor, he answered.
And I said, Mr. Taylor, would you please take your hat off?
And he said, well, it's very important to me that I wear my hat.
I said, well, it's very important to me that you take it off.
So I finished calling the role and I said, now this is a speech class and one of the things that we hope to learn, or I hope you'll learn, is the ability to persuade.
So I said, will you come up to the front of the room?
and persuade me by what you say, why it is more important for you to wear your hat than it is for me for you to take it off.
And so he got up to the front of the room and he said, well, I'm a transfer student.
I'm black.
Nobody knows me.
And this is one way to set myself apart and identify myself.
He said, now this young black lady, everybody knows and likes her, surrounds her, and I am totally ignored.
I'm a minority.
And he said, this is something that sets me apart and it's important to me.
So I said, well, you have persuaded me.
I said, I want you to know you can wear your hat, and I want you to know that there'll be no penalty to it on my part.
I said, if you continue to speak as you spoke just now, I'll guarantee you an end of course.
So the next day, it was a summer class and we met every day.
The next day he came to class and he didn't wear his hat.
I said, Mr. Taylor, you're not wearing your hat.
I said, I hope you don't think that you're going to be punished in any way for it.
He said, well, I've thought about it and I've decided it wasn't that important.
I said, well, you're obviously a young man who is capable of great education.
That's good.
What else?
Well, I remember the time that I bought the bonfire, my first bonfire.
I was horrified by the thought that if this fell and we're in such a cramped space, I'll be trampled to death.
It was across the street from the YMCA in a confined space.
So I never went back after that, and then we had the time that was bombed by or dived at by this
A plane had exploded and over a block away you'd find the engine in different parts and that horrified them.
wrote a satire on the bonfire in which I suggested that instead of having all of this labor go up in flames, I suggested we build Disneyland on the Brazos.
Using all of this labor, all of this wood, we would recreate the San Jacinto Monument.
the Alamo, and so on and so forth.
And we would charge admission and make money and buy us a damn good coach and a football team, professional football team.
And so I gave that to Carl Almquist, who was editor of the former Student Association paper.
And I said, you can publish this if you like.
And he read it and he said, well, I'm going to do us both a favor.
He said, I'm not going to print it.
He said, if this were printed, they'd ride you out of town on a rail.
Then they'd put the rail on the bonfire and you would.
That's about all I had.
Okay.
I have just two or three left then.
Let's make believe that you are now selected as the consultant